                            Program MDEVBUILD
                              29 April 2020

mdevbuild [options]

This program aids the build process of any firmware that includes generic
modular devices (MDEVs).  It reads all the MDEV files in the current
directory and any directories referenced by those files.  Those may in
turn reference other directories, which are also read, etc.  Interface
dependencies are followed, and the modules and files to be added to the
firmware are resolved.

See the MDEV documentation file for a overview of the MDEV mechanism.  See
the MDEV_FILE documentation file for details of the MDEV file format.

The command line options are:

  -FW fwname

    Explicitly set the name of the firmware being built.  FWNAME can be
    the full pathname of the firmware, just the bare name of the firmmare,
    the empty string, or not provided at all.  The default is the empty
    string.

    If FWNAME is the empty string, then the value of the environment
    variable FWNAME is used.  If the FWNAME environment variable does not
    exist, then FWNAME is left the empty string.

    If the resulting name (whether from FWNAME directory or the FWNAME
    environment variable) is a full firmware pathname (has more than one
    component), then that is used directly as the full firmware name.

    When the resulting name is just a bare firmware name, then there must
    be only one firmware defined by the MDEV file set with that bare name.

    When the resulting name is the empty string, then there must be
    exactly one firmware defined by the MDEV file set.

  -V

    Causes more verbose output.  Normally only new files or changes to
    existing files are mentioned.  The -V option can be useful for
    diagnosing problems with the build process.

This program writes or modifies a series of files in the current
directory:

  fwname_xxxx.DSPIC

    These are files resulting from copying templates and modifying them
    for the particulars of the firmware.  They are usually the top level
    source files of MDEV modules, copied from QQQ_xxxx.DSPIC templates,
    where xxxx is typically the MDEV module name.

    If a target file already exists, it is not altered.

  BUILD_MDEVS_INIT.BAT

    This file is intended to be called from the BUILD_FWINIT.BAT build
    script.  BUILD_MDEVS_INIT.BAT generally grabs additional files
    necessary for building the MDEV modules included in the firmware.

    This file is written each time, but is always sorted.  Therefore, no
    net changes are made unless the list of MDEVs changes.

  BUILD_MDEVS.BAT

    This file is intended to be called from the BUILD_FW.BAT script.
    BUILD_MDEVS.BAT builds the source modules for all the MDEVs in the
    firmware.

    This file is written each time, but is always sorted.  Therefore, no
    net changes are made unless the list of MDEVs changes.

  fwname_MDEV.INS.DSPIC

    Include file intended to be referenced from the firmware main include
    file.  Fwname_MDEVS.INS.DSPIC generally consists of commands to
    include files with definitions and declarations that need to be global
    within the firmware.

    The CFG_module preprocessor constants are also defined in this file.
    These constants give the 1-254 module IDs for the various MDEV modules
    in the firmware.

    This file is overwritten if previously existing.

  fwname_CONFIG_MDEVS.INS.DSPIC

    Include file intended to be referenced from the CONFIG firmware
    module.  This file contains executable code to run the configuration
    routines of each MDEV module in the firmware, except for the special
    and mandatory MDEV SYS.  The MDEV modules are initialized in
    dependency order.  When a module config routine is called, the config
    routines of all modules that provide required interfaces have already
    been called.

    This file is overwritten if previously existing.

  fwname.MLIST

    This file is edited to include the object files of all MDEV modules in
    this firmware.  The result is always sorted alphabetically by file
    name.

    This file is always read and re-written.  However, if all the MDEV
    module object files are already listed, and in alphabetical order,
    then no net change will have been made.

  fwname_IDS.MDEV

    This is a valid .MDEV file, and will therefore be read by future runs
    of this program.  The file contains a FIRMARE command with ID
    subcommands for each MDEV module included in the firmware.

    This file is overwritten if it previously exists.  However, since the
    file will have been read by this program, any assigned IDs will be
    preserved.  In effect, this means that once a MDEV module is included
    in the firmware, and thereby assigned an ID, that ID will not change
    in the future as the mix of MDEV modules changes.
